 Sydney Childrens Hospital Network


#### General Pipeline information

Bioinformatics pipeline is composed of two stages - bam processing and variant calling are part of a _NextGENe_ workflow, with default settings mostly maintained. The variant annotation is performed in _Alamut_. The pipeline is rarely re-configured.

#### Sample QC
 * Sample mix-ups are diagnosed via sex checks.

#### FASTQ QC

 * demultpliex - bcl2fastq2. Additional adaptor trimming at the 3' adaptor end as part of Nextgene workflow as there are often issues with over-read into 3' end.
 * _FastQC_
 * The report generated by FastQC is examined prior to variant reporting. The purpose of this report is mostly to assist with any troubleshooting.

#### Alignment/Assembly

 * Read alignment -  PCR duplicate marking  - as part of _NextGENe_ workflow
 * Read improvement - indel realignment as part of _NextGENe_ workflow

#### BAM QC

 * Coverage assessed in NextGENe. A report containing bam quality metrics is generated and output as an excel file. No. of reads, no. of variant calls, average read depth are evaluated by the bioinformatician. NextGENe flags metrics that fall outside of a default acceptable range.

#### Variant Calling

 * vcf 4.1

#### SNV & Indels 
 * As part of NextGENe workflow. Sample-by-sample calling.

#### Structural variants & CNV's 

 * CNV's also called as part of the NextGENe workflow as a diagnostic tool and as part of the sex-check. Not evaluated as a mutation of interest.

#### Variant Annotation

 * vcf file generated by NextGENe is imported into _Alamut batch_
 * Generates a list of actionable variants.
 * Annotation sources:

#### Variant Filtering
 * Variants with read depth < 1 and variant proportion < 20%

#### Annotation filters 

 * Hard-cut based on 1 % population frequency (exac, MAF)
 * Variant effect: non-synonymous variants, synonymous/intronic variant plus a predicted effect on splicing
 * Variant compared to an in-house database to filter common variants and known artefacts.

#### Post-annotation filters 
 * Additional annotation and filters by comparing against clinical databases (ClinVar)
 * Mode of inheritance filters

#### Variant QC

 * Variant quality not evaluated against 'hard thresholds' but instead a visual assessment by the bioinformatician/clinician

#### Verification/Validation

 * C4 and C5 pathogenic variants verified by Sanger sequencing.
 * Variants examined on a one-by-one basis in _Alumut visual_ for artifacts.
 * Sex check - as part of CNV analysis in NextGENe. Sex evaluated by examining number of duplication across X chromosome

#### Curation

#### Reporting

#### Packages - summary

||'''Stage''' ||'''Tools & version''' ||'''Data inputs''' ||
||Quality control || FastQC v, bcl2fastq || GrCh37 ||
||Duplicate marking || NextGENe ||
||Mapping || NextGENe||hg19.fasta ||
||Local realignment || NextGENe|| hg19.fasta, Mills & 1000g gold standard indels ||
||Base recalibration ||  ||CHECK dbSNP_138, Mills & 1000G gold standard indels ||
||Variant calling || NextGENe ||hg19.fasta, dbsnp_138 ||
||Genotype refinement || Not performed ||  ||
||Variant normalisation ||  ||hg19.fasta ||
||Variant filtering || NextGENe and Alamut ||  ||
||Variant annotation || Alamut ||   ||
||File manipulation ||  ||
